README.md, before:

# K-L-Memory: Spectral Covariance Memory for Long-Term Forecasting

## 📊 ETTh1 Benchmark Results

This repository implements **K-L-Memory (Karhunen-Loève Memory Tokens)**, a novel approach that combines classical signal processing with neural learning for efficient long-context sequence modeling. Our method achieves state-of-the-art results on the ETTh1 electricity transformer temperature forecasting benchmark.

### 🎯 Key Innovation

Unlike purely learned compression methods, K-L-Memory uses spectral decomposition to extract dominant temporal patterns from historical hidden states, then maps these components to task-specific memory tokens through a learnable neural projection. This provides:

- **Mathematical structure** from signal processing (K-L decomposition)
- **Task adaptation** through gradient-based learning
- **Provable optimality** in window complexity reduction (see Theorem 1 in paper)

## 🚀 Performance Results

### ETTh1 Long-Term Forecasting

We evaluate on the standard ETTh1 benchmark with input length 96 and prediction horizons {96, 192, 336, 720}:

| Model | Horizon 96 | Horizon 192 | Horizon 336 | Horizon 720 | Avg MSE | Improvement |
|-------|-----------|-------------|-------------|-------------|---------|-------------|
| **MSE** | | | | | | |
| Transformer | 0.865 | 0.984 | 1.128 | 1.388 | 1.091 | - |
| Autoformer | 0.449 | 0.500 | 0.521 | 0.664 | 0.534 | - |
| **K-L-Memory (Ours)** | **0.387** | **0.425** | **0.452** | **0.607** | **0.468** | **-12.6%** |
| **MAE** | | | | | | |
| Transformer | 0.713 | 0.757 | 0.809 | 0.991 | 0.818 | - |
| Autoformer | 0.459 | 0.479 | 0.491 | 0.575 | 0.501 | - |
| **K-L-Memory (Ours)** | **0.408** | **0.430** | **0.448** | **0.531** | **0.454** | **-8.3%** |

**Key Results:**
- 🏆 **12.6% MSE reduction** over Autoformer (averaged across all horizons)
- 🏆 **57% MSE reduction** over vanilla Transformer
- 🏆 Strongest improvements on shorter horizons (13-15% for h ∈ {96, 192})

## 🔧 Reproducing Results

### Prerequisites
```bash
# Install dependencies
pip install torch pandas numpy scikit-learn

# Clone repository
git clone https://github.com/[your-username]/K-L-Memory.git
cd K-L-Memory

# Download ETTh1 dataset
wget https://github.com/zhouhaoyi/ETDataset/raw/main/ETT-small/ETTh1.csv -P ./dataset/
```

### Running Experiments

For Apple Silicon (M1/M2/M3):
```bash
# Enable MPS fallback for compatibility
export PYTORCH_ENABLE_MPS_FALLBACK=1

# Run all prediction horizons
for pred_len in 96 192 336 720; do 
    python run.py \
        --task_name long_term_forecast \
        --is_training 1 \
        --root_path ./dataset/ \
        --data_path ETTh1.csv \
        --model_id ETTh1_96_${pred_len} \
        --model KLMemory \
        --data ETTh1 \
        --features M \
        --seq_len 96 \
        --label_len 48 \
        --pred_len $pred_len \
        --e_layers 2 \
        --d_layers 1 \
        --factor 3 \
        --enc_in 7 \
        --dec_in 7 \
        --c_out 7 \
        --train_epochs 10 \
        --batch_size 32 \
        --learning_rate 0.0001 \
        --itr 1 \
        --use_gpu false \
        --gpu_type mps
done
```

For CUDA GPUs:
```bash
# Simply change gpu settings
--use_gpu true --gpu_type cuda
```

### Architecture Configuration
```python
# K-L-Memory Settings (KLMemoryGemini3_3_8.py)
memory_depth=2048        # Deep history buffer
n_components=16          # Number of Eigencomponents to extract
memory_tokens=4          # Tokens injected into Transformer
d_model=512             # Hidden dimension

# Training Settings
batch_size=32
learning_rate=1e-4
epochs=10
early_stopping_patience=3
```

## 🏗️ Model Architecture

### Core Components

1. **Spectral Covariance Memory**: Extracts dominant temporal patterns via K-L decomposition
   - Computes covariance kernel: `K = H @ H.T`
   - Eigendecomposition: `L, V = torch.linalg.eigh(K)`
   - Selects top-k principal components

2. **Learnable Memory Projection**: Maps K-L components to task-specific memory tokens
   - MLP with GELU activation
   - Trained end-to-end via backpropagation

3. **Channel Independence**: Treats each variable as separate univariate series
   - Enables learning frequency-specific patterns per channel

4. **Flatten Head Decoder**: Direct mapping from sequence representation to predictions
   - Maps `(Seq_Len * d_model)` → `(Pred_Len)`

### Why K-L-Memory Works

- **Provable Optimality**: K-L minimizes window complexity (Theorem 1)
- **Natural Denoising**: Eigenvalue truncation filters uncorrelated noise
- **Efficient Compression**: T=2048 states → K=16 components → M=4 tokens
- **Linear Scaling**: O(L) complexity with infinite context capability

## 📈 Computational Efficiency

| Metric | Value |
|--------|-------|
| Training Time | ~340 seconds/epoch (M1 Mac CPU/MPS) |
| Memory Overhead | ~5% vs baseline Transformer |
| VRAM Usage | O(1) - constant regardless of sequence length |
| Scaling | O(L) - linear with sequence length |

## 📚 Comparison with Related Work

| Method | Basis Type | Learnable | Adaptive | Benchmark |
|--------|------------|-----------|----------|-----------|
| Compressive Transformer | None | ✓ Learned | Task-only | - |
| Autoformer [[Wu et al., 2021]](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.13008) | Trend/Seasonal | ✗ Fixed | Fixed prior | SOTA until 2024 |
| iTransformer [[Liu et al., 2024]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2510.02729) | Inverted attention | ✓ | Task-only | Current SOTA |
| **K-L-Memory (Ours)** | K-L + MLP | ✓ | Data + Task | Competitive |

## 🔬 Technical Details

### Spectral Covariance Memory (K-L Transform)
```python
# Core K-L decomposition (simplified)
H = F.normalize(self._history, p=2, dim=1)  # Normalize history
K = torch.mm(H, H.t())                      # Gram Matrix
L, V = torch.linalg.eigh(K)                 # Eigendecomposition
V_top = V[:, top_k_indices]                 # Top-k eigenvectors
patterns = torch.mm(self._history.t(), V_top)  # Principal patterns
memory_tokens = self.component_mixer(patterns)  # Learnable projection
```

### Key Innovations
- **Feature Covariance Kernel** (not Time Kernel) - robust to batch shuffling
- **RevIN normalization** - handles non-stationary data
- **Principal Temporal Patterns** - eigen-features extracted on the fly

## 📝 Citation

If you use K-L-Memory in your research, please cite:
```bibtex
@article{klmemory2024,
  title={Karhunen-Loève Memory Tokens: Structured Temporal Compression 
         with Learnable Projection for Long-Context Transformers},
  author={Anonymous},
  journal={arXiv preprint},
  year={2024}
}
```

## 🔗 References - See paper for more 

- [Autoformer Paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.13008) - Decomposition transformers baseline
- [iTransformer Paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2510.02729) - Current SOTA comparison
- [Time Series Library](https://github.com/thuml/Time-Series-Library) - Benchmark implementation

## 📧 Contact

For questions or collaborations, please open an issue or contact [vincentmarquez405@gmail.com].

---

**Note**: K-L-Memory is part of ongoing research. While we achieve strong results on ETTh1, comprehensive evaluation across additional benchmarks (Weather, Traffic, ECL) is in progress.

Commit message:

Update README with training note and performance results
Added a note about model training results and early stopping.

README.md, after:

# K-L-Memory: Spectral Covariance Memory for Long-Term Forecasting

## 📊 ETTh1 Benchmark Results

This repository implements **K-L-Memory (Karhunen-Loève Memory Tokens)**, a novel approach that combines classical signal processing with neural learning for efficient long-context sequence modeling. Our method achieves state-of-the-art results on the ETTh1 electricity transformer temperature forecasting benchmark.

### 🎯 Key Innovation

Unlike purely learned compression methods, K-L-Memory uses spectral decomposition to extract dominant temporal patterns from historical hidden states, then maps these components to task-specific memory tokens through a learnable neural projection. This provides:

- **Mathematical structure** from signal processing (K-L decomposition)
- **Task adaptation** through gradient-based learning
- **Provable optimality** in window complexity reduction (see Theorem 1 in paper)

**Note:** All results were achieved without any pre-training - the model was trained from scratch in just 10 epochs with early stopping (patience=3), demonstrating that the K-L decomposition provides strong enough inductive bias for rapid convergence.
  
## 🚀 Performance Results

### ETTh1 Long-Term Forecasting

We evaluate on the standard ETTh1 benchmark with input length 96 and prediction horizons {96, 192, 336, 720}:

| Model | Horizon 96 | Horizon 192 | Horizon 336 | Horizon 720 | Avg MSE | Improvement |
|-------|-----------|-------------|-------------|-------------|---------|-------------|
| **MSE** | | | | | | |
| Transformer | 0.865 | 0.984 | 1.128 | 1.388 | 1.091 | - |
| Autoformer | 0.449 | 0.500 | 0.521 | 0.664 | 0.534 | - |
| **K-L-Memory (Ours)** | **0.387** | **0.425** | **0.452** | **0.607** | **0.468** | **-12.6%** |
| **MAE** | | | | | | |
| Transformer | 0.713 | 0.757 | 0.809 | 0.991 | 0.818 | - |
| Autoformer | 0.459 | 0.479 | 0.491 | 0.575 | 0.501 | - |
| **K-L-Memory (Ours)** | **0.408** | **0.430** | **0.448** | **0.531** | **0.454** | **-8.3%** |

**Key Results:**
- 🏆 **12.6% MSE reduction** over Autoformer (averaged across all horizons)
- 🏆 **57% MSE reduction** over vanilla Transformer
- 🏆 Strongest improvements on shorter horizons (13-15% for h ∈ {96, 192})

## 🔧 Reproducing Results

### Prerequisites
```bash
# Install dependencies
pip install torch pandas numpy scikit-learn

# Clone repository
git clone https://github.com/[your-username]/K-L-Memory.git
cd K-L-Memory

# Download ETTh1 dataset
wget https://github.com/zhouhaoyi/ETDataset/raw/main/ETT-small/ETTh1.csv -P ./dataset/
```

### Running Experiments

For Apple Silicon (M1/M2/M3):
```bash
# Enable MPS fallback for compatibility
export PYTORCH_ENABLE_MPS_FALLBACK=1

# Run all prediction horizons
for pred_len in 96 192 336 720; do 
    python run.py \
        --task_name long_term_forecast \
        --is_training 1 \
        --root_path ./dataset/ \
        --data_path ETTh1.csv \
        --model_id ETTh1_96_${pred_len} \
        --model KLMemory \
        --data ETTh1 \
        --features M \
        --seq_len 96 \
        --label_len 48 \
        --pred_len $pred_len \
        --e_layers 2 \
        --d_layers 1 \
        --factor 3 \
        --enc_in 7 \
        --dec_in 7 \
        --c_out 7 \
        --train_epochs 10 \
        --batch_size 32 \
        --learning_rate 0.0001 \
        --itr 1 \
        --use_gpu false \
        --gpu_type mps
done
```

For CUDA GPUs:
```bash
# Simply change gpu settings
--use_gpu true --gpu_type cuda
```

### Architecture Configuration
```python
# K-L-Memory Settings (KLMemoryGemini3_3_8.py)
memory_depth=2048        # Deep history buffer
n_components=16          # Number of Eigencomponents to extract
memory_tokens=4          # Tokens injected into Transformer
d_model=512             # Hidden dimension

# Training Settings
batch_size=32
learning_rate=1e-4
epochs=10
early_stopping_patience=3
```

## 🏗️ Model Architecture

### Core Components

1. **Spectral Covariance Memory**: Extracts dominant temporal patterns via K-L decomposition
   - Computes covariance kernel: `K = H @ H.T`
   - Eigendecomposition: `L, V = torch.linalg.eigh(K)`
   - Selects top-k principal components

2. **Learnable Memory Projection**: Maps K-L components to task-specific memory tokens
   - MLP with GELU activation
   - Trained end-to-end via backpropagation

3. **Channel Independence**: Treats each variable as separate univariate series
   - Enables learning frequency-specific patterns per channel

4. **Flatten Head Decoder**: Direct mapping from sequence representation to predictions
   - Maps `(Seq_Len * d_model)` → `(Pred_Len)`

### Why K-L-Memory Works

- **Provable Optimality**: K-L minimizes window complexity (Theorem 1)
- **Natural Denoising**: Eigenvalue truncation filters uncorrelated noise
- **Efficient Compression**: T=2048 states → K=16 components → M=4 tokens
- **Linear Scaling**: O(L) complexity with infinite context capability

## 📈 Computational Efficiency

| Metric | Value |
|--------|-------|
| Training Time | ~340 seconds/epoch (M1 Mac CPU/MPS) |
| Memory Overhead | ~5% vs baseline Transformer |
| VRAM Usage | O(1) - constant regardless of sequence length |
| Scaling | O(L) - linear with sequence length |

## 📚 Comparison with Related Work

| Method | Basis Type | Learnable | Adaptive | Benchmark |
|--------|------------|-----------|----------|-----------|
| Compressive Transformer | None | ✓ Learned | Task-only | - |
| Autoformer [[Wu et al., 2021]](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.13008) | Trend/Seasonal | ✗ Fixed | Fixed prior | SOTA until 2024 |
| iTransformer [[Liu et al., 2024]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2510.02729) | Inverted attention | ✓ | Task-only | Current SOTA |
| **K-L-Memory (Ours)** | K-L + MLP | ✓ | Data + Task | Competitive |

## 🔬 Technical Details

### Spectral Covariance Memory (K-L Transform)
```python
# Core K-L decomposition (simplified)
H = F.normalize(self._history, p=2, dim=1)  # Normalize history
K = torch.mm(H, H.t())                      # Gram Matrix
L, V = torch.linalg.eigh(K)                 # Eigendecomposition
V_top = V[:, top_k_indices]                 # Top-k eigenvectors
patterns = torch.mm(self._history.t(), V_top)  # Principal patterns
memory_tokens = self.component_mixer(patterns)  # Learnable projection
```

### Key Innovations
- **Feature Covariance Kernel** (not Time Kernel) - robust to batch shuffling
- **RevIN normalization** - handles non-stationary data
- **Principal Temporal Patterns** - eigen-features extracted on the fly

## 📝 Citation

If you use K-L-Memory in your research, please cite:
```bibtex
@article{klmemory2024,
  title={Karhunen-Loève Memory Tokens: Structured Temporal Compression 
         with Learnable Projection for Long-Context Transformers},
  author={Anonymous},
  journal={arXiv preprint},
  year={2024}
}
```

## 🔗 References - See paper for more 

- [Autoformer Paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.13008) - Decomposition transformers baseline
- [iTransformer Paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2510.02729) - Current SOTA comparison
- [Time Series Library](https://github.com/thuml/Time-Series-Library) - Benchmark implementation

## 📧 Contact

For questions or collaborations, please open an issue or contact [vincentmarquez405@gmail.com].

---

**Note**: K-L-Memory is part of ongoing research. While we achieve strong results on ETTh1, comprehensive evaluation across additional benchmarks (Weather, Traffic, ECL) is in progress.
